# IA-32

> aka. Intel Architecture, 32-bit

The IA-32 arch can run in three modes:

1. Protected Mode(Native)
    - Each running program is reserved a linear address space in memory of 4GB
    - programs aren't allowed to access each others' allocated memory space. 
    - Windows and Linux run in this mode.
2. Real-Address Mode
    - Compatible with legacy programs written for the Intel 8086 processor family
3. System Management Mode (SMM)
    - The processor will switch to a separate address space so vital memory isn’t affected.

## Registers

> they're even faster (and smaller) than L1 cache.

- Changes made to these sub-registers are reflected in the larger register, so be careful.


### Instruction Pointer Register (EIP)

- It contains the offset (in the current Code Segment) of the next instruction to be executed.
- EIP cannot be directly accessed expect for `JMP`, `CALL`, `RET` instructions.
- (Instruction Execution Cycle) Intel IA-32 architectures prefetch instructions. => while you’re executing an instruction, `EIP` will already be pointing at the next instruction

### General Purpose Register Structure

- `EAX` is used as an implied operand in a great many ALU operations. For example, when using the MUL (multiply) instruction on 32-bit operands, the lowest 32 bits of the result will automatically go into the EAX register.
- `EDX` is an implied extension of EAX for computing ALU operations that may extend beyond 32-bits. 
    - E.g., when using MUL, the highest 32 bits of the result will go into the EDX register.
- `ECX` is used as a "counter" by a number of instructions, including `LOOP` and `REP`.
- `ESI/EDI` are used by memory transfer functions as the source (ESI) and destination (EDI) addresses. Because of this, it has become standard practice to use these registers for the same purposes even when they’re not used automatically. When directly writing to memory, the address of the memory location to be overwritten should be stored in EDI. Conversely when reading from memory, the address of the memory location to be read should be in ESI.
- ESP is the Stack Pointer and should always point to the top of the Runtime Stack. While it is listed as a general purpose register it should absolutely not be used like one.
- EBP is the register automatically used by higher-level languages to point to the base of a Stack Frame.
    - It should not be used for general purposes.